# credit-risk-classification Report 

## Overview of the Analysis

# Purpose and Data
The purpose of this analysis is to determine risk factors for future financial loans.  The data provided contained details from over 77,000 past loans.  For each loan, information was given on different factors, including:
- loan size
- interest rate
- borrower income
- debt to income ratio
- number of accounts
- derogatory marks
- total debt

Each loan was then marked as whether it was defaulted on or not.  This data set was to be analyzed and used to predict whether future loans, when given those same statistics, would be classified as normal loans or high-risk loans (likely to be defaulted on).  Machine learning models from various python libraries were used to train the model and test it. In the second model RandomOverSampler was used to create balanced value sets for the training data.   

# Training and Testing Model

The data provided was split into two groups: a larger group meant to train the model, and a smaller group that would provided the ability to test the model. The model was trained, and then tested against the second set of data.  The model predicted whether each loan in the test set would be a high-risk loan or not.  Since we have the answers, we are able to compare the test predictions generated by the model against them and determine the accuracy of the model.  An accuracy score and confusion matrix were generated based on the test resuts.   

## Results

* Machine Learning Model 1:
    - Accuracy: 0.95
    - Precision: Class 0: 1.00
                 Class 1: 0.85
                 Weighted Average 0.99
                 Macro Average 0.92        
    - Recall: Class 0: 0.99
              Class 1: 0.91
              Weighted Average 0.99
              Macro Average 0.94 


* Machine Learning Model 2 (Resampled Data):
    - Accuracy Score: 0.99
    - Precision: Class 0: 1.00
                 Class 1: 0.84
                 Weighted Average 0.92
                 Macro Average 0.99        
    - Recall: Class 0: 0.99
              Class 1: 0.99
              Weighted Average 0.99
              Macro Average 0.99 

## Summary
 * In our first machine learning model, we see fairly good results.  The accuracy score comes out at 0.95, which shows that the model is performing well in finding which loans are high risk and which ones are not.  The confusion matrix, which is used to identify false positives and false negatives, is showing that the model predicted over 55,000 true negatives, and only 181 false negatives.  On the positive side, the model predicted 1700 true positives, compared to 277 false positives.  Overall, the model is doing a great job of identifying those high-risk loan offers. From the classification report, we can see that precision was lowest on identifying high-risk loans, but the average was still high, probably due to the higher amount of low risk (0) compared to high-risk loans (1) in the testing sample.  
 * For our second model, we resampled the data using RandomOverSampler. This created a training set with an equal amount of low risk and high risk loans.  By balancing out the numbers, you can create a training model that is more accurate. This second model was run and produced an accuracy score of 0.99, almost perfect. However, when running the classification report, we do see that the precision score for high-risk loans has dipped from 0.85 to 0.84, meaning a few less high-rish loans were identified. When taking the average of the two scores, however, we see extremly high scores.  
 * Recommendations: Although the second model provides higher scores on average, the difference is not extreme, and there is a higher rate of incorrectly identifying high-risk loans.  Although small, that is the end purpose of this code, so in my recommendation, the first model should be used. Although the overal performance is lower, finding high-risk loans is the most important, and therefore, the first model should be used. 


## Libraries 
Code is written in Python, using the following libraries: Pandas, Numpy, Pathlib, SkLearn, Imblearn

## Author
Code written by Alana Castellano, with starter code provided by Data Analytics Bootcamp and Ariel Gamino.



 